---
layout: post
title: Ugh, GamerGate
---

It's not surprising, but the state of video games has not improved any since we last left it in flames weeks ago. I posted then about my feelings, which were mixed. That has also not changed, but rather solidified. Which is why I say "UGH!", because it means this drama has to be prolonged, and the world outside games points at us and laughs.  

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/rX7wtNOkuHo" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>  

Still: it's worth examining a little more, as tiresome as it is. When we left it, #GamerGate had been started in earnest, but was quickly painted as a misogynist movement. Things are a bit different now. Many gamers have taken up the #GamerGate flag, even withstanding the revelation that at least part of it was devised by 4chan, the anonymous forum that spawns some... let's say *interesting* content. It's not surprising that elements of #GamerGate are astroturfed, but it's also not an indictment or reason to abandon it. That's the nature of social media today. Someone invents a hashtag, and it takes off. People attach meaning and arguments to it. At least in this regard, #GamerGate is not especially corrupted by this revelation.   

The thing about 4chan, Anonymous, Reddit, and various dark places of the Internet is, they are not good enemies to have. As a warning, though: Anonymous clearly looks like it is not taking part in this fight. Anyway, because these groups are great at digging up information, through hacking or legitimate means, they can shape discussions. And information is power, trite as that sounds. So what #GamerGate has is the power to investigate every little detail of their targets. And as humans, no matter if we're feminists, morally good, or ethically pure; we all make mistakes and tell little white lies. And that's exaclty what seems to be happening now. Even the smallest slip-up or fib, like a feminist video game blogger living with an indie game developer, or a woman overblowing their online harassment to make a point, blows up into proof of corruption and hypocrisy.  

Still, Zoe Quinn enjoys great mainstream and video game press coverage, as does Anita Sarkeesian. Personally, after reviewing this whole mess, I am pretty ambivalent toward Zoe Quinn. I'm glad she makes games, and I want her to continue, even if I will never play them. I think everyone, absolutely everyone, who wants to make games should. I just don't like her or Phil Fish as people. So what, though? I could say that about hundreds of video game developers, indie or AAA. And it sure as hell doesn't mean she should be treated like she has been. It's disgusting.    

Anita Sarkeesian, however, is doing something different. She is not a game developer, she is a very much needed video game critic. We don't really have those in video games. Sure, we have *reviewers*, but the criticism is few and far between, usually only seen in sites like [Rock, Paper, Shotgun](http://www.rockpapershotgun.com/) (Sorry, [Kotaku](http://kotaku.com/) is pretty bad at both game coverage *and* criticism). Her analysis is barely controversial, and part of what makes me hesitate to adopt the #GamerGate flag is that many in that movement actually find Anita's analysis unfair. They nitpick about the motives she has. I've seen this before, and it's usually a right-wing hack overanalysing motives of a director or documentarian they disagree with ideologically, so they pretend to address works on their "merit" or try to diminish the author because, so they accuse, they have an agenda or are biased. This supposed idea of objectivity, whether in art or jounalism is one I've hotly contested for years. It simply doesn't exist, and asking for objectivity in art or journalism is disingenuous and wrong.   

And now I finish with yet again calling for both sides to not engage in such vitriol. But really, that will never be heeded. Instead of growing up in the age of Internet trolling and insults in the 90s and rejecting that behavior, we all seem to have instead adopted that behavior. We know words matter, we know they cause damage, and yet we think we can simultaneously take the high ground while debasing people. You can't thread that needle. So while #GamerGate has a lot more to account for on the harassment side, we can't really excuse people like Leigh Alexander saying "gamer" as word needs to die because of its associated behavior, and yet she regularly spits bile and claims she will personally try to get people fired who embrace the #GamerGate movement. What, in her mind, would that accomplish, other than more hate and misunderstanding?    

So, yikes. As much as I would like this whole thing to go away, it doesn't look like it will any time soon. There are some bright spots, like video game sites updating their policies. A general awareness that women in tech and women just trying to play or tweet about video games online face daily, despicable harassment. But it was totally not worth it. Ugh.
